Add scs-0219-v2: recommends Gateway API, dropping any mention of Ingress (#1195)
SovereignCloudStack/standards: Standards/scs-0219-v2-kaas-networking.md

---
title: KaaS Networking Standard
type: Standard

> status: draft

Reviewer: ```suggestion
status: Draft
```
The allowed values are case-sensitive and the CI check fails on this.

## Terminology

The following terms are used throughout this document:

| Term | Meaning |
|------|---------|
| KaaS, managed Kubernetes | Kubernetes as a Service, automated on-demand deployment of Kubernetes clusters. |
| CSP | Cloud Service Provider, the provider of the KaaS infrastructure. |
| CNI | Container Network Interface, a standardized networking interface for container runtimes. |
| CNI plugin, networking plugin | Kubernetes bindings for a CNI implementation, translates Kubernetes API concepts into more basic container networking concepts. |
| network policy | A set of rules to restrict network traffic in a Kubernetes cluster. |

## Motivation

KaaS providers will typically support aditional networking functionality beyond basic Kubernetes networking.
The specific range of features depends on the used CNI plugin, but may also be extended by additional operators.
Users may expect certain optional functionality, so we should define a baseline feature set that has to be available in an SCS-compliant KaaS cluster.

## Design Considerations

The Kubernetes API can be extended arbitrarily.

> Many CNI plugins will define custom resources to enable functionality that is not covered in the official [API specification](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.31/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Many CNI plugins will define custom resources to enable functionality that is not covered in the official [API specification](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.36/).
```

Reviewer 2: In case there is no specific reason to put 1.31 here, we could as well use 1.36

### Options considered

#### NetworkPolicy API

Kubernetes network policies are used to restrict network traffic between pods in a cluster, but also between pods and external network resources.
The policy rules can filter based on port and address ranges, but also on Kubernetes-specific target attributes such as namespaces and labels.
They must be implemented by the CNI plugin, and though they are widely supported, they are still technically optional, and there are some lightweight networking plugins, such as Flannel, that are not enforcing them.

Nonetheless, network policies are widely used and most users will expect them in a managed Kubernetes cluster.
The wide, but varying support among CNI plugins makes them a good target for SCS standardization.

#### Default Network Policies in Namespaces

Basic network policies are namespaced resources, and can only filter traffic to and from pods in their own namespace.
In a newly created namespace without policies the default behavior will apply, which is to not restrict traffic at all.

> It can be desirable to automatically create default network policies in new namespaces, using a policy operator such as Kyverno.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It can be desirable to automatically create default network policies in new namespaces, using a policy operator such as [Kyverno](https://kyverno.io/) or [Open Policy Agent](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/).
```

A CSP could provide such an operator and offer a number of default policies, like blocking connections to other namespaces by default, or blocking access to the OpenStack metadata service.

Any user with permissions to manage their own network policies in a namespace will of course be able to remove or modify any default network policies in that namespace.
CSP-provided network policies should thus only be viewed as a safety default, and should only be deployed if they are actually beneficial to users.

#### AdminNetworkPolicy API

An alternative to automatically created default network policies are API extensions that allow cluster-wide networking rules.
Some CNI plugins have implemented such extensions, e.g. Calico's `GlobalNetworkPolicy` and Cilium's `CiliumClusterwideNetworkPolicy`.

> The Kubernetes Network Special Interest Group is currently working on an [official API extension](https://network-policy-api.sigs.k8s.io/api-overview/) to cover this functionality.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Kubernetes Network Special Interest Group is currently (as of June 2026) working on an [official API extension](https://network-policy-api.sigs.k8s.io/api-overview/) to cover this functionality.
```

This API extension introduces the new `AdminNetworkPolicy` and `BaselineAdminNetworkPolicy` resources, which represent cluster-wide network policies with respectively higher or lower precedence than namespaced network policies.

This API is also a good candidate for standardization because it consolidates a number of vendor-specific workarounds to limitations of the NetworkPolicy API.

> It has not been stabilized yet, so currently we can at most recommend CNI plugins where there is ongoing work to support these features.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It has not been stabilized yet (v1alpha2 status as of June 2026), so currently we can at most recommend CNI plugins where there is ongoing work to support these features.
```

Even with a CSP-provided default Ingress controller present, users will be able to use alternative Ingress controllers by creating a new `IngressClass`, which can then be referenced in Ingress resources.

#### Gateway API

The Kubernetes Gateway API is the successor to the Ingress API and provides a more expressive, role-oriented model for managing traffic into a cluster.
It introduces new resource types, enabling more flexible and extensible traffic routing across L4 and L7.

Unlike Ingress, which is a single resource with limited extensibility, the Gateway API separates concerns between infrastructure providers and application developers:

- Infrastructure providers define and manage GatewayClass and Gateway resources.
- Application developers attach routing rules via Route resources such as HTTPRoute.

This separation allows for safer multi-tenancy and clearer ownership boundaries, which are particularly relevant in managed Kubernetes environments.

The Gateway API is designed to be implementation-agnostic but requires a controller to reconcile its resources, similar to Ingress.

> Support for the Gateway API is growing across multiple projects, including implementations based on Envoy, HAProxy, and CNI-integrated solutions such as Cilium.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Support for the Gateway API is growing across multiple projects, including implementations based on Envoy, HAProxy, and CNI-integrated solutions such as Cilium. Some Ingress providers like Taefik have also implemented the needed interfaces to fully support Gateway API to enable users to migrate from one to the other.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Support for the Gateway API is growing across multiple projects, including implementations based on Envoy, HAProxy, and CNI-integrated solutions such as Cilium. Some Ingress providers like Traefik have also implemented the needed interfaces to fully support Gateway API to enable users to migrate from one to the other.
```

Reviewer: (Taefik -> Traefik)

While the Gateway API is more powerful and flexible than Ingress, it is still evolving and not yet universally supported across all environments and tooling.

## Decision

CSPs MUST provide a network plugin that fully supports `NetworkPolicy` resources in the API version `networking.k8s.io/v1`.
CSPs SHOULD provide a network plugin that supports or is working on support for the `AdminNetworkPolicy` and `BaselineAdminNetworkPolicy` resources of the `policy.networking.k8s.io` API group, in their latest version, up to `v1`.

> CSPs SHOULD offer the option for a managed, `networking.k8s.io/v1`-compliant Ingress controller and a default `IngressClass` resource for this controller.
> 
> CSPs SHOULD offer support for the Gateway API (`gateway.networking.k8s.io`), including at least the `GatewayClass`, `Gateway`, and `HTTPRoute` resources, either as a managed offering or as an installable option.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CSPs MUST either offer the option for a managed, `networking.k8s.io/v1`-compliant Ingress controller and a default `IngressClass` resource for this controller, or support for the Gateway API (`gateway.networking.k8s.io`), including at least the `GatewayClass`, `Gateway`, and `HTTPRoute` resources, either as a managed offering or as an installable option. They MAY also offer both of them.
```

Reviewer: This is a policy decision that should be discussed separately.
Original proposal has two recommendations.
Your wording has one requirements (with two options to fulfill it).
I'm not sure the requirement really helps the target audience:
As an application DevOps person, your wording gives me a guaranteee that at least Ingress or Gateway is available. But it's still hard to build automation (deployment files / helm charts / ...) such that it would work across KaaS offerings that differ in their offer here.
To make it more useful we might just require Gateway as managed or installable option. But maybe we're a bit early for this?

I would probably vote for
CSPs MAY offer Ingress.
CSP SHOULD offer Gateway (managed or installable option)
and use wording that suggests that the Gateway may become a MUST at some point in the future.

-> Discussion needed (SIG / Hackathon)

CSPs MAY add default networking restrictions, using either `networking.k8s.io/v1`-compliant `NetworkPolicy` resources with a policy operator, or alternatively any cluster-wide network policy extensions provided by the CNI plugin.

### Version history

> This is version 2.0. It adds the recommendation of the Gateway API and drops any mention of Ingress API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is version 2.0. It adds the recommendation of the Gateway API in addition to the Ingress API.
```

> These APIs address overlapping use cases, they will continue to coexist, and we opted to recommend Gateway only.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These APIs address overlapping use cases. Although they will continue to coexist, we recommend the usage of Gateway API.
```
